# The Compiler for Qwerty, a Basis-Oriented Quantum Programming Language

This is the compiler (and examples) for Qwerty, a quantum programming language
embedded in Python. It is licensed under the MIT license. If you want to contribute
or have issues, you can check out [`CONTRIBUTING.md](CONTRIBUTING.md).

Documentation
-------------

The `docs/` directory contains more documentation that doesn't fit in this
README:

* [`docs/project-structure.md`](docs/project-structure.md): An overview of the
  contents of this project (i.e., which files do what) and how the sections in
  the paper submission map to source files.
* [`docs/examples.md`](docs/examples.md): A list of the example programs found
  in the `examples/` directory in this directory.
* [`docs/testing.md`](docs/testing.md): Details on our multi-faceted testing
  framework.
* [`docs/debugging.md`](docs/debugging.md): Guide for debugging the
  Qwerty compiler when it misbehaves.
* [`docs/qiree.md`](docs/qiree.md): Directions for building a copy of the
  Qwerty compiler/runtime that integrates with [QIR-EE][49], an execution
  engine for QIR.
* [`docs/upgrading-llvm.md`](docs/upgrading-llvm.md): Describes the
  semi-automated process for upgrading the version of LLVM used by the Qwerty
  compiler.

The rest of this README is dedicated to installation, basic testing, and
troubleshooting.

Quick Start: Installing a Binary Build
--------------------------------------

If you are not doing development on the Qwerty compiler and you don't need the
very latest compiler/runtime version, you can try installing a binary build.

1. Download the `.whl` corresponding to your platform of choice from [the
   latest GitHub release][43]
2. Install the wheel (binary) with pip:
   ```
   $ pip install *.whl
   ```
3. Download [an example like `bv_simple.py`][44] and test that it works:
   ```
   $ python3 bv_simple.py 1101
   1101
   ```

If you hit problems, please ask for help (<aja@gatech.edu>).

Building the Compiler on Your Own Machine
-----------------------------------------

### Step 1: Setting Up LLVM

[LLVM][25] is a heavy-duty compiler framework we use, along with its
sub-project [MLIR][26], in the Qwerty compiler.
Qwerty currently requires LLVM 20.1.6.
If you want to build the Qwerty compiler, you have two options to satisfy the
LLVM dependency: (1) download pre-built LLVM libraries or (2) build LLVM
yourself. We discuss both options below.

#### Option 1: Use a Pre-Built LLVM Tarball

You can download our builds of LLVM from here:
<https://github.com/gt-tinker/qwerty-llvm-builds/releases/tag/v20.1.6>

##### macOS/Linux

You can extract it with something like:

    $ export LLVM_INSTALL_DIR=~/bin/llvm20
    $ mkdir -p "$LLVM_INSTALL_DIR"
    $ tar -C "$(dirname "$LLVM_INSTALL_DIR")" -xJvf ~/Downloads/llvm_mlir_rel_v20_1_6_x86_linux.tar.xz
    $ export PATH=$PATH:$LLVM_INSTALL_DIR/bin/
    $ export MLIR_DIR=$LLVM_INSTALL_DIR/lib/cmake/mlir/

All three `export`s above should probably be in [your `~/.bashrc`][24] (or your
`~/.zshrc` if you use zsh, e.g., if you are a macOS user).

##### Windows

Download the `.zip` above and put it somewhere like `C:\qwerty\llvm20`. (Avoid
spaces in the path.) Then press _Start_ and type in "environment variables"
(either system or user should be fine). Set `MLIR_DIR`
to `C:\qwerty\llvm20\lib\cmake\mlir` and add `C:\qwerty\llvm20\bin` to `Path`.

#### Option 2: Build LLVM Yourself

See [`docs/build-llvm.md`](docs/build-llvm.md).

### Step 2: Building the Rest of the Qwerty Compiler

#### macOS/Linux

To test that LLVM was installed right in the last section, make sure the
following commands produce the expected output:

    $ mlir-opt --version
    LLVM (http://llvm.org/):
      LLVM version 20.1.6
      Optimized build with assertions.
    $ llvm-config --version
    20.1.6

Next, you need to install [Rust][8] (for [`qir-runner`][10]),
[`python3-venv`][45] (to make a **v**irtual **env**ironment),
[`python3-dev`][9] (Python C API headers for the Python C extension), and
[`libffi-dev`][28] and [`libxml2-dev`][39] (apparently required by
`qir-runner`, possibly transitively), [`libzstd-dev`][33] (an LLVM dependency).

Finally, to build, run the following in a cloned copy of this repository (the
first two commands are a one-time thing):

    $ git submodule update --init tpls/tweedledum tpls/qir-runner tpls/googletest
    $ python3 -m venv venv
    $ . venv/bin/activate
    $ pip install -v .

_(Warning: the CMakeCache generated by [skbuild][48] might cause bizarre build
errors under unusual circumstances (such as upgrading LLVM), so try deleting
`_skbuild/` if you are seeing weird build issues.)_

Now, to test everything is working, try running one of the examples:

    $ python3 examples/dj.py
    Constant test:
    Classical: constant
    Quantum: constant

    Balanced test:
    Classical: balanced
    Quantum: balanced

For a more comprehensive test, you can run the following if you built with the
environment variable `QWERTY_BUILD_TESTS=true` (e.g., if you ran
`QWERTY_BUILD_TESTS=true pip install -v .`):

    $ test/run-tests.sh
    [...voluminous output...]
    100% tests passed, 0 tests failed out of 1

    [...voluminous output...]
    Ran 41 tests in 10.390s

    OK

#### Windows

First, install [Visual Studio][7], [Rust][8] and [Python 3][41].

Then, open a **Command Prompt** (i.e., `cmd`, _not_ PowerShell) and make sure
that LLVM is installed correctly from the previous section:

    > mlir-opt --version
    LLVM (http://llvm.org/):
      LLVM version 20.1.6
      Optimized build with assertions.
    > llvm-config --version
    20.1.6

Still inside of `cmd` (_not_ PowerShell), run the following commands inside a
cloned copy of this repository (`setup-env.bat` configures Visual Studio to
build an amd64 binary and tells CMake to use `ninja` instead of `msbuild`, both
avoiding very strange errors — treat `setup-env.bat` as an extension of
`activate.bat` in that you'll need to run it in every fresh terminal you build in):

    > git submodule update --init tpls\tweedledum tpls\qir-runner tpls\googletest
    > python -m venv venv
    > ci\build-windows\setup-env.bat
    > venv\Scripts\activate.bat
    > pip install -v .

Now try one of the examples:

    > python examples\dj.py
    Constant test:
    Classical: constant
    Quantum: constant

    Balanced test:
    Classical: balanced
    Quantum: balanced

To run the test suite, rebuild with tests included:

    > set QWERTY_BUILD_TESTS=1
    > pip install -v .

And then try running the tests:

    > test\run-tests.bat
    [...voluminous output...]
    100% tests passed, 0 tests failed out of 1

    [...voluminous output...]
    Ran 41 tests in 10.390s

    OK

Troubleshooting
---------------

If your compilation process keeps getting sniped by the OOM killer, as seen
below:

    c++: fatal error: Killed signal terminated program cc1plus
      compilation terminated.

Then a potential fix is to add the following code near the top of your
`CMakeLists.txt` both in `/` and  `/tpls/tweedledum`:

    set_property(GLOBAL APPEND PROPERTY JOB_POOLS link_job_pool=1)
    set(CMAKE_JOB_POOL_LINK link_job_pool)
    set_property(GLOBAL APPEND PROPERTY JOB_POOLS compile_job_pool=1)
    set(CMAKE_JOB_POOL_COMPILE compile_job_pool)

This tells CMake to tell Ninja to limit the number of linking and compilation
jobs done in parallel to just 1 each, although this can be changed by changing
the above parameters.

Citation
--------

To cite the Qwerty compiler, you can cite our paper in CGO '25:

Austin J. Adams, Sharjeel Khan, Arjun S. Bhamra, Ryan R. Abusaada, Anthony M.
Cabrera, Cameron C. Hoechst, Travis S. Humble, Jeffrey S. Young, and Thomas M.
Conte. "**Asdf: A Compiler for Qwerty, a Basis-Oriented Quantum Programming
Language**." To appear in _2025 IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Code
Generation and Optimization (CGO '25)_. March 2025.

BibTeX citation:

    @inproceedings{adams_asdf_2025,
        title = {{Asdf}: {A} {Compiler} for {Qwerty}, a {Basis-Oriented} {Quantum} {Programming} {Language}},
        booktitle = {2025 {IEEE}/{ACM} {International} {Symposium} on {Code} {Generation} and {Optimization} ({CGO})},
        author = {Adams, Austin J. and Khan, Sharjeel and Bhamra, Arjun S. and Abusaada, Ryan R. and Cabrera, Anthony M. and Hoechst, Cameron C. and Humble, Travis S. and Young, Jeffrey S. and  Conte, Thomas M.},
        month = mar,
        year = {2025}
    }

The evaluation for the CGO '25 paper uses additional code not on the `main`
branch of this repository. You can find that evaluation code in [the Zenodo
artifact][50] or on the `cgo25-artifact` branch.

[7]: https://visualstudio.microsoft.com/
[8]: https://www.rust-lang.org/tools/install
[9]: https://packages.ubuntu.com/search?keywords=python3-dev
[10]: https://github.com/qir-alliance/qir-runner/
[24]: https://unix.stackexchange.com/q/129143/62375
[25]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/LLVM
[26]: https://mlir.llvm.org/
[28]: https://sourceware.org/libffi/
[33]: https://github.com/facebook/zstd
[39]: https://github.com/GNOME/libxml2
[41]: https://www.python.org/downloads/windows/
[43]: https://github.com/gt-tinker/qwerty/releases/latest
[44]: https://github.com/gt-tinker/qwerty/blob/main/examples/bv_simple.py
[45]: https://packages.ubuntu.com/search?keywords=python3-venv
[48]: https://github.com/scikit-build/scikit-build-core
[49]: https://github.com/ORNL-QCI/qiree
[50]: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.14080494
